Multiple Articles: Getting Started: CMake / CLI / Visual Studio (#168)
microsoft/vcpkg-docs: vcpkg/get_started/get-started-vs.md

---
title: Install and use packages with vcpkg in Visual Studio
description: Tutorial guides the user through the process of installing and using packages with vcpkg and Visual Studio.
zone_pivot_group_filename: zone-pivot-groups.json
zone_pivot_groups: operating-systems
author: JavierMatosD
ms.author: javiermat
ms.topic: tutorial
ms.date: 09/27/2023
ms.prod: vcpkg

> #CustomerIntent: As a beginner C++ developer, I want to learn how to install and manage packages using vcpkg, so that I can easily set up and maintain C++ projects with necessary dependencies.

Reviewer: Should mention Visual Studio and CMake.

---

# Tutorial: Install and use packages with vcpkg

This tutorial shows you how to create a C++ "Hello World" program that uses the `fmt` library with CMake, vcpkg and Visual Studio. You'll install dependencies, configure, build, and run a simple application.

## Prerequisites

- [Visual Studio with C++ development workload](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/)

> - [CMake](https://cmake.org/download/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

VS comes with CMake. We should probably note that the user needs to install the CMake recommended component.

- [Git](https://git-scm.com/downloads)

[!INCLUDE [setup-vcpkg](setup-vcpkg.md)]

## 2 - Set up the Visual Studio project

1. Create the project directory

>     We'll be working within a directory named `helloworld`. Ensure that this directory is a sibling of your vcpkg directory, meaning both directories should reside under the same parent directory.

Reviewer: It would be really nice to avoid mandating this, but I understand it gets awkward below to remind the user to set `VCPKG_ROOT`.

    
    * Open Visual Studio
    * Click on "Create a new project."
    * Choose "Empty Project" as the template.
    * Name your project "helloworld."
    * Set the location to be the parent directory of your vcpkg installation.
    * Check the box for "Place solution and project in the same directory."

>     * Click the "Create."

Reviewer: I'm pretty sure these are MSBuild instructions. Have you tried walking through this article step-by-step?

I think you need to choose `"CMake Project"`, not `"Empty Project"`. It will also create a `CMakeLists.txt` for you, so below it should say to "replace the content" with such and such.

Author: I walked through the tutorial step-by-step. I just didn't think to use a CMake project.

Reviewer 2: I prefer starting with an empty project, the default CMake project has too much boilerplate for my linking.

Author: I walked through the tutorial this morning with @ras0219-msft using the "CMake Project" instead of "Empty Project," and it just comes with the "CMakeLists.txt" and a "CMakePresets.json". The tutorial would then be "replace the contents with what we provide, build, run". The "Empty Project" produces .vcxproj files and other msbuild-related files that aren't needed for the tutorial. Given that, I agree we should use the "CMake Project" template.

  
2. Generate a Manifest file

>     Create a vcpkg manifest file (`vcpkg.json`) by executing the following command in Visual Studio's built-in terminal:

Reviewer: Probably needs docs on how to get to the VS dev console.

    ```console

>     ../vcpkg/vcpkg new --application

Reviewer: I believe this will warn the user about conflicts between the in-box `VCPKG_ROOT` and their chosen direct path to the tool.

    ```

    The `vcpkg new` command adds a `vcpkg.json` file and a `vcpkg-configuration.json` file to your projects directory. To view the manifest file (`vcpkg.json`) toggle the "Folder view" in the solution explorer.

    The `vcpkg.json` file should look like this:

    ```json
    {}
    ```

    This is your manifest file. vcpkg reads the manifest file to learn what dependencies to install and integrates with CMake to provide the dependencies required by your project. Initially, the file contains an empty JSON object; additional attributes like dependencies and supported features can be added as your project grows.

>     The default `vcpkg-configuration.json` file introduces [baseline](../reference/vcpkg-configuration-json.md#registry-baseline) constraints, specifying the minimum versions of dependencies that your project should use. While this allows for more granular control over your project's dependencies, a detailed discussion is beyond the scope of this tutorial.

Reviewer: I think this wording still leaves the user confused about their state; should I keep the file or not? Instead, I think it would be better to say something like "a detailed discussion of modifying this file is beyond the scope ..." and to explicitly call out that it _should_ be added to your source control.

## 3 - Add dependencies and create project files

Now that the project is set up, add the `fmt` library as a dependency and generate the project files.

1. Add the `fmt` dependency

    From within Visual Studio's built-in terminal, run:

    ```console
    ../vcpkg/vcpkg add port fmt
    ```

    Your `vcpkg.json` should look like this:

    ```json
    {
        "dependencies": [

>         "fmt"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            "fmt"
```

        ]
    }
    ```

2. Create project files

    Create the `main.cpp` file with the following content:

    :::code language="cpp" source="../examples/snippets/get-started/main.cpp":::

>     In this `main.cpp` file, the `<fmt/core.h>` header is included for using the `fmt` library. The `main()` function then utilizes `fmt::print()` to output the "Hello World!" message to the console.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    In this `main.cpp` file, the `<fmt/core.h>` header is included for using the `fmt` library. The `main()` function then calls `fmt::print()` to output the "Hello World!" message to the console.
```

    Create the `CMakeLists.txt` file with the following content:

    :::code language="cmake" source="../examples/snippets/get-started/CMakeLists.txt":::

    Now, let's break down what each line in the `CMakeLists.txt` file does:

    - `cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.10)`: Specifies that the minimum version of CMake required to build the project is 3.10. If the version of CMake installed on your system is lower than this, an error will be generated.
    - `project(HelloWorld)`: Sets the name of the project to "HelloWorld."
    - `find_package(fmt CONFIG REQUIRED)`: Looks for the `fmt` library using its CMake configuration file. The `REQUIRED` keyword ensures that an error is generated if the package is not found.
    - `add_executable(HelloWorld main.cpp)`: Adds an executable target named "HelloWorld," built from the source file `main.cpp`.
    - `target_link_libraries(HelloWorld PRIVATE fmt::fmt)`: Specifies that the `HelloWorld` executable should link against the `fmt` library. The `PRIVATE` keyword indicates that `fmt` is only needed for building `HelloWorld` and should not propagate to other dependent projects.

> 

Reviewer: This still needs presets, etc? How does VS find vcpkg?

zone_pivot_group_filename: zone-pivot-groups.json
zone_pivot_groups: operating-systems
author: JavierMatosD
ms.author: javiermat
ms.topic: tutorial
ms.date: 09/27/2023
ms.prod: vcpkg
#CustomerIntent: As a beginner C++ developer, I want to learn how to install and manage packages using CMake and Visual Studio, so that I can easily set up and maintain C++ projects with necessary dependencies.
---

# Tutorial: Install and use packages with CMake in Visual Studio

This tutorial shows you how to create a C++ "Hello World" program that uses the `fmt` library with CMake, vcpkg and Visual Studio. You'll install dependencies, configure, build, and run a simple application.

## Prerequisites

- [Visual Studio](<https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/>) with C++ development workload and [CMake component](<https://learn.microsoft.com/cpp/build/cmake-projects-in-visual-studio#installation>)
- [Git](<https://git-scm.com/downloads>)

## 1 - Set up vcpkg

[!INCLUDE [setup-vcpkg](setup-vcpkg.md)]

## 2 - Set up the Visual Studio project

1. Create the Visual Studio project
    
    * Create a new project in Visual Studio using the "CMake Project" template

>     ![vs-create-new-cmake-project](../resources/get_started/visual-studio-create-project.png)

Reviewer 2: We should have alt-text and descriptions for every image.

```
:::image type="complex" source="../resources/image.png" alt-text="short description":::
Long description goes here
:::image-end:::
```

    * Name your project "helloworld"
    * Check the box for "Place solution and project in the same directory."

>     * Click the "Create"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * Click the "Create" button
```

    * Click the "Create"

2. Configure the `VCPKG_ROOT` environment variable.
   
    Open the built-in Developer PowerShell window (``Ctrl+` ``) in Visual Studio and run the following commands:

    ```console
    $env:VCPKG_ROOT = "C:\path\to\vcpkg"
    $env:PATH = "$env:VCPKG_ROOT;$env:PATH"
    ```

>     Setting `VCPKG_ROOT` helps Visual Studio locate where your vcpkg instance is located.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Setting `VCPKG_ROOT` helps Visual Studio locate your vcpkg instance.
```

    Adding it to `PATH` ensures you can run vcpkg commands directly from the shell.

> 3. Generate a Manifest file and add dependencies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Generate a manifest file and add dependencies.
```

    Run the following command to create a vcpkg manifest file (`vcpkg.json`):

    ```console
    vcpkg new --application
    ```

>     The command adds a `vcpkg.json` and a `vcpkg-configuration.json` file to your project directory. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    The [`vcpkg new`](../commands/new.md) command adds a `vcpkg.json` file and a `vcpkg-configuration.json` file in the project's directory. 
```

    Add the `fmt` package as a dependency:

    ```console
    vcpkg add port fmt
    ```

    Your `vcpkg.json` should now contain:

    ```json
    {
        "dependencies": [
            "fmt"
        ]
    }
    ```

    This is your manifest file. vcpkg reads the manifest file to learn what dependencies to install and integrates with CMake to provide the dependencies required by your project.

>     The default `vcpkg-configuration.json` file introduces [baseline](../reference/vcpkg-configuration-json.md#registry-baseline) constraints, specifying the minimum versions of dependencies that your project should use. While modifying this file is beyond the scope of this tutorial, it plays a crucial role in defining version constraints for your project's dependencies. Therefore, even though it's not strictly necessary for this tutorial, it's a good practice to add `vcpkg-configuration.json` to your source control to ensure version consistency across different development environments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    The generated `vcpkg-configuration.json` file introduces a [baseline](../reference/vcpkg-configuration-json.md#registry-baseline) that places [minimum version constraints](../users/versioning.md) on the project's dependencies. Modifying this file is beyond the scope of this tutorial. While not applicable in this tutorial, it's a good practice to keep the `vcpkg-configuration.json` file under source control to ensure version consistency across different development environments.
```

## 3 - Set up the project files

1. Modify the `helloworld.cpp` file.

    Replace the content of `helloworld.cpp` with the following code:

    :::code language="cpp" source="../examples/snippets/get-started/main.cpp":::

>     In this `helloworld.cpp` file, the `<fmt/core.h>` header is included for using the `fmt` library. The `main()` function then calls `fmt::print()` to output the "Hello World!" message to the console.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    This source file includes the `<fmt/core.h>` header which is part of the `fmt` library. The `main()` function calls `fmt::print()` to output the "Hello World!" message to the console.
```

2. Configure the `CMakePresets.json` file.
   

>    * Rename the `CMakePresets.json` to `CMakeUserPresets.json`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * Rename `CMakePresets.json` to `CMakeUserPresets.json`
```

alternatively, "Rename the `CMakePresets.json` file to `CMakeUserPresets.json`"

   * Update its contents as shown below. Replace `<VCPKG_ROOT>` with the path to your vcpkg directory.
  
  ```json
  {
    "version": 3,
    "configurePresets": [
      {
        "name": "default",
        "cacheVariables": {
          "CMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE": "<VCPKG_ROOT>/scripts/buildsystems/vcpkg.cmake"
        }
      }
    ]
  }
  ```

>   * Add `CMakeUserPresets.json` to you `.gitignore` file if you're using version control. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Since this file includes a hardcoded absolute path, it is recommended that you don't keep this file under source control. If you're using Git, add `CMakeUserPresets.json` to your `.gitignore` file.
```

>    This `CMakeUserPresets.json` file contains a single "default" preset for CMake and sets the `CMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE` variable. The `CMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE` allows the CMake project system to recognize C++ libraries provided by vcpkg. Adding the `CMakeUserPresets.json` automates the process of specifying the toolchain when running CMake.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   The `CMakeUserPresets.json` file contains a single preset named "default", this preset sets the [`CMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE`](<https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/variable/CMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE.html>) to use vcpkg's CMake toolchain file. This lets vcpkg provide packages to CMake when you configure and build the project. Read the [vcpkg CMake integration documentation](../users/buildsystems/cmake-integration.md) to learn more.
```

3. Edit the `CMakeLists.txt` file.
   
    Replace the contents of the `CMakeLists.txt` file with the following code:

    :::code language="cmake" source="../examples/snippets/get-started/CMakeLists.txt":::

    Now, let's break down what each line in the `CMakeLists.txt` file does:

>     - `cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.10)`: Specifies that the minimum version of CMake required to build the project is 3.10. If the version of CMake installed on your system is lower than this, an error will be generated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - `cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.10)`: Specifies that the minimum version of CMake required to build the project is 3.10. If the version of CMake installed on your system is lower than this, the build fails.
```

---
title: Install and use packages with CMake in Visual Studio
description: Tutorial guides the user through the process of installing and using packages with CMake and Visual Studio.
zone_pivot_group_filename: zone-pivot-groups.json
zone_pivot_groups: operating-systems
author: JavierMatosD
ms.author: javiermat
ms.topic: tutorial
ms.date: 09/27/2023
ms.prod: vcpkg
#CustomerIntent: As a beginner C++ developer, I want to learn how to install and manage packages using CMake and Visual Studio, so that I can easily set up and maintain C++ projects with necessary dependencies.
---

# Tutorial: Install and use packages with CMake in Visual Studio

This tutorial shows you how to create a C++ "Hello World" program that uses the `fmt` library with CMake, vcpkg and Visual Studio. You'll install dependencies, configure, build, and run a simple application.

## Prerequisites

> - [Visual Studio](<https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/>) with C++ development workload and [CMake component](<https://learn.microsoft.com/cpp/build/cmake-projects-in-visual-studio#installation>)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Visual Studio](<https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/>) with C++ development workload and [CMake component](</cpp/build/cmake-projects-in-visual-studio#installation>)
```

- [Git](<https://git-scm.com/downloads>)

## 1 - Set up vcpkg

[!INCLUDE [setup-vcpkg](setup-vcpkg.md)]

## 2 - Set up the Visual Studio project

1. Create the Visual Studio project
    
    * Create a new project in Visual Studio using the "CMake Project" template
    :::image type="complex" source="../resources/get_started/visual-studio-create-project.png" alt-text="create a new CMake project":::
        Screenshot of how to create a new CMake project in Visual Studio
    :::image-end:::
    * Name your project "helloworld"
    * Check the box for "Place solution and project in the same directory."
    * Click the "Create" button
    ![vs-name-the-project](../resources/get_started/visual-studio-name-project.png)

2. Configure the `VCPKG_ROOT` environment variable.
   
    Open the built-in Developer PowerShell window (``Ctrl+` ``) in Visual Studio and run the following commands:

    ```PowerShell
    $env:VCPKG_ROOT = "C:\path\to\vcpkg"
    $env:PATH = "$env:VCPKG_ROOT;$env:PATH"
    ```

>     ![visual-studio-developer-powershell](../resources/get_started/visual-studio-environment-variable-setup.png)

Reviewer 2: Image missing alt-text and description

    Now, let's break down what each line in the `CMakeLists.txt` file does:

    - `cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.10)`: Specifies that the minimum version of CMake required to build the project is 3.10. If the version of CMake installed on your system is lower than this, the build fails.
    - `project(HelloWorld)`: Sets the name of the project to "HelloWorld."
    - `find_package(fmt CONFIG REQUIRED)`: Looks for the `fmt` library using its CMake configuration file. The `REQUIRED` keyword ensures that an error is generated if the package is not found.
    - `add_executable(HelloWorld helloworld.cpp)`: Adds an executable target named "HelloWorld," built from the source file `helloworld.cpp`.
    - `target_link_libraries(HelloWorld PRIVATE fmt::fmt)`: Specifies that the `HelloWorld` executable should link against the `fmt` library. The `PRIVATE` keyword indicates that `fmt` is only needed for building `HelloWorld` and should not propagate to other dependent projects.

## 4 - Build and run the project

1. Build the project.
   
   Press `Ctrl+Shift+B` to build the project in Visual Studio.
   

2. Run the application.

    Finally, run the executable:

>     ![run-the-vs-project](../resources/get_started/visual-studio-run-project.png)

Reviewer 2: Needs alt-text and description

    You should see the output:

>     ![see-the-output](../resources/get_started/visual-studio-helloworld-output.png)

Reviewer 2: Same as above
